I was raised in the house with him, Mr. Felix
McMillan. And they taught me mighty good. They
teach me good. They said, I remember, says, Joe, I
said, yes, sir. When we are dead and in heaven, they
said, we want to raise you as an intelligent
nigger. We want you to have good friends like we've
got. Say you'll never be scratched by good, rich,
sensible white folks because they can tell who you
are by your raising and your compliments. To show
that you've been raised, he said, not by the color,
but by the white. I washed in iron. Some days I'd
wash a hundred pieces. Some, every morning, I'd
have five beds to mix up, five fires to mix, and the
children to dress, and churning to do. And after
that, but then I'd have some parts of the day. But I
had all that to do every day. Raised right up in the
house. You know, I remember telling them one
story. You know, I slept like in this room, and they
slept joining the rooms to me, you know. They said,
Joe, if it gets cold, come in our room. I said,
great, great, great.
Well, can't you tell a story about your open
girlhood days and about who raised you? Go ahead.
Come on, Jim. No, you. Yeah, you. Oh, I always was a
good girl. I don't know any stories on me. Well, did
you work in the field or work in the house? I worked
in the field and the house, too. Both places. But
I'd like to see you in the building. Uh-huh. Why did
you like the field the best? Well, just because I
catch more good breeze and more good fresh air out
in the field than I do in the kitchen, in the house.
Now, you know that. I didn't go to the field until I
was 19 years old. I love the field. I went to the
field when I was 19 years old, and I remember the old
boy said, well, Joe, you know, I had three Jims
there. And I had one Jim, two Jim Max, and one Jim
Turner, Kenneth. And, uh, My brother Jim Mack, he
was a colorful and a white Jim, you know. He went
with my old boys to look for the Jim Kennards, you
know, and to put me to flying, you know. The girl
said, sir, I want you to go up there in a while to be
able to sleep. The flyer said, when Miss Dora call,
you go back to the house and see to the baby stuff.
Baby went to sleep, and I slept two or three hours,
and I fly to the old boy's side back. But I didn't
like the field. Didn't go to the field. I didn't go
to the field. What kind of work did you like best in
the field? Picking cotton. Picking cotton.
Picking cotton. How much could you pick in a day?
Well, 150, 60 cents. He wasn't pickin' very hard.
Now, in them days, Miss Dora had a horse named John.
And said, Joey, you can fly, old John. I said, yes, I
know I can. What have you got to do? Go down in the
field and fly, old John, and nothing to do. I said,
oh, I want to go to the field. He looked at me and
laughed. You know what I tell the story. You know
what I love to do? To hide to be in the field. He said,
well, you go out there and check the old John. Go
down there and fly with Miss Dora's cat. And you
know, I went, called old John Hiddens to the tennis
ground, went down there and started dancing, and
come down there sitting down by a big old old, big
old neck on the street. I was sitting down there at
the beach, and he said, Joe, I said, sir, did you
climb in this door at that time? I said, yes, yes,
yes. He said, check out old John Gordy, I'll see you
in a minute. I don't know, I don't know. I don't
know, I don't know. I don't know, I don't know. I
don't know.
Yeah. Okay.
Well, Mr. Johnson, we're going to start off.
All right. All right. I want you to tell me how you
got your name. I got my name from President Jeff
Davis. The president of the Southern
Confederacy. He owned my grandfather and my
father. He brought them from Richmond, Virginia.
My grandfather was a blacksmith. My father was a
young kid, wasn't grown. And my father had learned
how to write a little bit in Richmond, Virginia
before he brought me down here. Grandfather used
to keep chalk in his shop to mark the odd things. And
my father would take a piece and put it in his pocket
And passing from Master Jeff's house, he's right
on the sidewalk. And so one morning, Master Jeff
come by and saw I was right on the walk. He go up
against the cook, who there, Mere Liza. He's right
on the sidewalk. Who's right out there? He said, I
don't know, Master Jeff. He said, come out there,
I'll show you how to do it. So he read it. He said,
Mere Liza, if you can find where I might walk out
there, I can't lie to you, so he's pretty dressed.
He said, yes, Master Jeff. So one morning, he's out
for some fish water. And she came out of this pen and
she looked around and saw my father down with me
right on the sidewalk. She told him, I'll tell you.
I'll tell you something for the boy to come to the
shop, come to the house, and ask him who in my life.
He said, I'll tell you if I never had a life in this
machine, never had a life in my life. So he brought
me down here. He did, yes. He gave me a punch. He
said, I got it, my name. My father named my idea. He
called it Mike. That's my name. He wrote Jeff
Davis' name. He wrote two names. They were dirty.
They were a rich boy. They were a rich boy. He said,
uh-huh, Ike, that's pretty nice of you. They sent
him back to the shop, and Martha Giles started to
listen to me, and he got two teachers. He opened a
nice school. He educated all these niggas. He made
my father a souvenir. And he made a couple of nice
little gummies as bookkeepers. And all in all,
they made different things. Farms, cotton,
sawmills, gins, and all that kind of stuff. That's
the record of my father and Colonel Montgomery.
Colonel was born in those events. He was born on
Hurricane Plantation, just a giant piece of
biofield. I was born on biofield. Moshe Jeff had
fire plantations over there. Hurricane,
biofield, hurricane, power mine, and lake place.
It all belonged to Moshe Jeff. And he had all those
niggas from different places, all the plans to
come back to school. Night school. He gave them all
a form of education. When they all got free, they
could take it themselves. He had so much business,
he couldn't hire people who got business. He had
kids. He needed education so he could tend to his
business. He wanted to learn to tend to Moshe's
business. He was admired. Obedient. Kept while he
was gone, he obeyed Moshe. Once Moshe was going to
land in the boogie, in the hack, The gate was
locked. The same old man I tell you about, old man
Jack Rayner, he got to the gate, he said, Marcy,
this gate's locked. He said, well, Jack, it's
locked. It's my gate. Bring it down. It's my gate.
So the boy picked it up, and Jack didn't break down
the gate. He took the fence down and drove on
through there, and the wagon went on behind him,
you understand, with the bands, cams, and land.
And when he come back, they put the fence up. That's
the original Marcy up in his nickels. And when he
met a Negro on the road, first thing he must have
done was look at the ceiling and say, it's that
time. And everyone would give him the same thing
back. Give him honor. And when he'd come home from
New Orleans up to the bend, Steve would land. He'd
unload the freight and load the cotton. And he'd
get the bait there and sleep. And the captain would
say, is Mr. Davis up? No, he ain't up. I really want
him up. Wait till he wake up. Mr. Davis wake up. And
he'd come downstairs, he'd pick up a chair and all,
pack it up out on the land, send it down to his hack,
and he'd get up and buy it about the third time
before he'd get in his hack. He never allowed him to
do anything like that. He just obeyed him. They all
obeyed Marshal Jeff. The white people would
always go out to the bank fishing and hunting on the
banks when Marshal Jeff would be in the base fleet.
They never did anything like that. They always
obeyed him all the time, white and black. He gave
them all. His best man would escort him home,
escort him back when he got ready. And, uh, he's on a
pageant that one day on Lake Place. He told Mr.
Corleone, he said, Mr. Corleone, I'm going home
tomorrow. He said, don't get to feed my niggas. And
he gets to lay them by the crops. Let them be with
them, cut the cordwood. But don't disturb them. I
want them undisturbed. He said, anything happen
to any of my niggas, you wait and see Mr. Davis. And
don't forget I'm Mr. Davis. He said, my nigga is my
summer shade. He's my weather fire. He's my
umbrella. Don't disturb him. So they laid by a crop
over there with sweeps. Mr. Colt, I want you to lay a
crop with color fields. That wouldn't do no good.
It wouldn't cut those vines. The Negro who must
have been educated, one who actually laid by a crop
with double sweeps. And he come back and helped
Colt. And the next day he fired away, man. He wanted
to play and live like he wanted to. He laid by the
crop like he wanted, you understand. He had his
crop cleaned, Master Jeff, cut them with those big
switches and go in the middle, clean them out, you
understand, which he couldn't do. He kept those
vines, jumped those vines. The trees killed all of
them. He cleaned his place out, the lake place. He
had a hundred trees over there. He had all those
mules from different plants, you understand,
from where he cleaned that place. He had plenty of
stock, you know. These are real stock. All you
stick now on Hurricane, there's a pass over there,
old Long Hill Sugar, outside the roadside, you
know. All that stock he bought from Master Jeff,
all that stock. Mules, cows, horses, everything
else. Horses, everything else. Sheep, goats, all
brought to him. Now he had those sheep sheared,
seven times a year, and they had wool and shipped it
somewhere. Say you do cotton, gather the gin and
pack it. He had three, four steam gins,
understand, see? These steam gins on Hurricane,
one on Briarfield, one on everything else. Three
gins, I know. He had three gins, three gins. And
whatever he wanted, he got slaughtered on
Hurricane for a steam milk quarter. And when you
want a thing done, you just put it on paper and it's
gone. It's done.
You tell me how the story as to how Isaac T.
Montgomery's father saved the plantation during
the Civil War for him? Yeah, well, when the young
was coming south to look after those places down
there, he robbed somebody. I'm being serious. And
Ben went to Ole Miss, Miss Irene, his wife. She
said, Ole Miss, I've got to go to Richmond. I've got
to see Mars Jeff. She said, you want to see Mars Jeff
with Ben? I said, I've got to see him. She said, no,
Miss, you can't do no good. I can't. I don't want to
see you. I want to see Mars Jeff. I want a passport.
Send me to Richmond to see Mars Jeff. So they gave
him Ben the passport. And I went to Richmond. He got
some bread in the sack. I went to Richmond to see
him. I went to Richmond to see him. I went to
Richmond to see him. I went to Richmond to see him. I
went to Richmond to see him. I went to Richmond to
see him. I went to Richmond to see him. I went to
Richmond to see him. I went to Richmond to see him.
Walk in there, howdy, Marshal Jeff. Hey, Ben's
been here. Can I come in and see you, Marshal Jeff?
He said, Ben, I'm telling you all you know. Howdy,
everybody at home. He said, everybody's welcome,
Marshal Jeff, but somebody come and see you about.
He said, where is Ben? He said, Marshal Jeff, those
Yankees are coming south, near Bixbury. They're
coming down south, getting all that folks land,
and robbing the niggers, stealing all the mules,
and they're in pursuit of David's land. That's
what I want you to do. He said, where is Ben? I want
you to leave the land to me. Five. He said, then I'm
going to go, girl. I said, don't you belong to me.
The land's mine. You're mine. I said, how you know?
I said, my God, free me, man. I said, bring you
right. So he took him big up to the San Diego coast.
And leave the land to him and free him. And made
notes, some notes unpaid, you understand. And
three or four unpaid. And so I'm back home, and the
angels got out into the bin out home there. The
angels come, you understand, and they ask the days
of the land, the days of the farm. The days ain't got
no land. The old man is here. He's gone to Ben
Montgomery. Why is Ben Montgomery here? He said,
come here, Ben. This old man, he asked, where'd you
get that? Brought it from my old master.
He called Mrs. He asked her to bring his old papers,
you understand. Show it to him. He made those notes
and papers, you understand. Uh-huh. That is your
land. I don't know what kind of nigger your land.
But I don't. I don't cross the river. It's my land,
though. And when the freedom time come back,
Master Jeff come on home, you understand, and he
give him a cotton basket of money. What he done?
Cotton basket, cotton basket. Oh, not quite high
as the table. Like that old basket now. That was on
Bradfield Place, on Bradfield, right in Master
Jeff's house. Well,
this band, you say that Jefferson Davis organized
for his slaves. Yes, sir. Can you tell me a little
something about that band? Tell me a little
something about that band. You
started to tell me about this band that...
Jefferson Davis organized for his slaves. Yes, he
organized that band for his Negroes. And Davis had
been on barkeep transition. And he hired a man
named Charles Morgan to teach them boys music. And
he taught those boys music. They got to where he
could play. They escorted him from Lennon up home
in a wagon. And his band would play for him going and
coming. And after he got through, he played in a
bomber's uniform. And in that band, there's been
bands. That's quite everywhere he went. How many
pieces were in the band? Fourteen. Fourteen men in
the band. Fourteen men. What kind of music did they
play? Do you remember any of the pieces they
played? Oh, Lord, yes, indeed. No, I played
myself. I played Grand National, Fourth Watch,
East Richmond, Mount Rose, Dream On, Flea the
Buried to the Mountain, Nut Gilded, Dance
Theater, Armistice Surgeon, Fire on Quickstep,
all that kind of stuff. We play it up here in the
store. Oh, a name, Samoy, if you remember any of
them. That's Pete Dreamall. That's Pete
Dreamall.
Did you ever play this piece, Dixie, that was so
popular? Dixie, oh yeah, Pete Dixie. Yeah, I ain't
paid enough. And, uh... Flora Fluck. Flora Fluck.
And...
I don't know the other people. I'm a soldier, I
think
it was. And, uh...
Well, did you, uh, you all didn't play any
plantation songs? No, sir. I played street music
myself. I got music. I didn't risk having pebbles.
And Lion Healer. And George Sullivan. That's
where I got music. We got a band from Lion Healer in
Chicago. Well, did the other slaves on the
plantation sing any of the plantation songs? They
sing in the fields and sing around the place? Did
you ever sing in the yard? for him when he had
visitors, anything like that? Well, the kids
would sing some little funny things, you know,
around there, and dance and all that got, you know.
They had a little play, used to play down there,
play, uh, scripture sound, you understand? Dance
to the bottle. Sit down all day, you know, and
they'd dance, you know, of course, scripture
sound. Everybody danced scripture sound, they'd
ring play, you know. And, uh, they'd go dance, each
time, dance with that bottle, he'd dance with the
bottle, and the whole bottle would break. set up,
you understand, and just play that song around
that place and sing Scoop to Sam and dance with that
brother, or that Rick. Well, do you remember any of
the words of Scoop to Sam? No, I don't remember
those words now. Which I could relate to. It's a
long... And I heard we had a little song you sang,
too, going to the lady, yes, I am, and she was
talking to the man. Do you know that? No, that's the
first word I think about, thank you. Do you
remember any of the other lines of it? No, sir.
No, sir. Well, did you all have any dancers at that
time, or had you joined the church? Yeah, we had
dancers. We had dancers. We had dancers, you know,
this, this, this, quite a quantity. We had
dancers, 32 on the set, and 24 on the set. They had
this thing called Tommy's Apartment, and dancing
apartment I got in, Tommy's Swing. All that kind of
stuff, you understand, see? And, uh, he probably
went to the bar. He had a bar, you know, where they
bought candy and so on, I guess, you know. And
apples and oranges, you understand, he'd carry a
pot and spin a dime or a quarter on it and buy him
candy. I'll cook something, I guess, you know. You
know, he had no silverware, you understand. He
had, uh, lemonade made in the barrel. He had no,
nothing like silverware then. No more
silverware. Did you all sing any songs at those
dances while you were doing the quadrille and the
promenade? No, I didn't sing. I had to think about
dancing and hooping hollies. Did you have anybody
to call figures? Oh, yes, indeed. I had a fellow
here. He played my band's call figures. A fellow
named Hicks Singleton. He did now. He was
naturally a smart fellow. He was about my age. He
was a jolly fellow. He knew all that kind of stuff,
that dancing stuff, you know. I never was a dancer.
I played myself in music. I liked music. Did you
play for these dancers? Oh, yes, yeah. Yes, sir.
Well, what year did you leave the... and leave
Davis' band? Davis' band left Davis' band in the
year of 84. Now Davis' band came out here from
Fiskeburg. And we come to Fiskeburg and stayed
there till the 87. And come out here and get in touch
with Mason McGinnis, his father-in-law, who was
one of the supervisors of the old company. He was a
white man at the time, see. And give him this part of
this land where he could dig out up here and make it
to the new city with his Negroes. And they got him
caught up here and dug this land. And I came with me
and another boy named Sheldon Allen. his father,
his third father, my father, Peter Montgomery. He
had 12 countries, you understand. And he lost his
land, you understand, up to December. In January,
he moved a few times here. His mother was the first
one to cook bread here. Cooked bread here in 87, on a
stump. Cooked bread on a stump. And now he had
bread. Now he had bread. In July 12, he even came up
big break up here, got a train at Marigold. Walked
up here, you understand? And the men had made some
stairs, course tires. They took the sliders,
picked them up, and made a shack. And that easy man
should cook that bread on the stump. That's the
push of the shack. Right out of the stump, he made a
big fire. We made a big fire for it and put both
coals, put it on the stump, and put the skillet on
there, you understand? Put the lid on the skillet
and put the coal on top of the lid and make that
bread. That way you got the first bread. That's the
87th. How many years has it been? Fifty-four
years. Fifty-four years. That's right. That's
right. I pulled a chain from this country for five
years. That line is out there. Run that line there.
Run your 36-mile league. I pulled that chain in 88.
And on that side, on the real road there, I pulled
that line in 87. Went to San Paolo, Costa Rica. I'll
tell you, it was about six miles away. Now, that
line, Major Fontaine, the chief engineer, told
Montgomery that this line was run by the guns of
this, a hundred years ago. He said, you'll find
different designs and different trees along this
line. You can be cutting fine old lines, fine old
stumps. We go in the tree, and I found a gun by the
tree, granted with some axes, and found a bottle in
the tree, and all people wanted to eat that bottle.
And they couldn't get all that paper and put it on
this book, you understand? Very well, it wouldn't
be because I cut the tree, you understand, see? And
they put another chip back in that tree. That tree
just cut out here, you fool there. Yes, sir. Now,
that line runs from a land to a city group. Doesn't
stop. Every county has its state. It has its own
supply. It has its own supply. That line down there
runs all this land from here to Shelby to your white
land. From here to Marygrove to your white land.
Cutting the canes, surveying, I had no team on
that. Just, just being a little bit by. Full team
cutting out there. Major Thornton. Major
Thornton was the chief in there. Well, how many
families were here the next year? Next year? Oh, we
got, we had about 15 families the next year. Just
about 15 families. Next year, we had about 15
families come here. About, that's been now the
next year. Becoming advertised, you understand,
getting people to come here. They come from the old
country, the South, you understand, see?
Kootenai, they had them come by letter and by
advertising paper. Newspaper, you understand?
They had the paper out there. After the trip that I
got, you know, he's trying to tell me all around the
country. They all come here on account of
Kootenai. They know what he's trying to do. Tell
all the folks in the land. Come to Daisy Bend, where
we left Daisy Bend. They all come to the bend. They
come across the road to Newtown, out of the Asian
Hills, from Peaksburg. Come back to Kootenai
because they know what he's trying to do. Give them
all a home. And they bought that land, and it's gone
now. The land here
is supposed to be gone. Yes, sir. Well, when would
you say that you had your greatest prosperity
here? Greatest prosperity? In life we had here
when Cousin I.S.U. lived, and Charles Banks, and
John Francis. It was the life of Mount Byrd. And
since they're gone, why is Mount Byrd gone?
There's no backbone. There's no backbone in this
curriculum here at all. You need somebody to get in
front. Every gang has to have a leader. If a gang of
chickens can't have a leader, well, they got no
leader, you understand. So you need leadership.
That's what they ain't got. Well, did you form a
band when you came here to Mount Byard? Yes, sir. We
were two bands here. Two brass bands. Yes, sir. And
the first teacher of that band we had, a fellow from
my home, told him to send his band down home there.
He's a young fella. Named Wilster. He played in a
band down there when I was quite big, I played in a
band. About to go with the band, you understand.
And he, when he come up there, you understand, he
said, let's get up in the band. I said, all right.
And we saved a little money, and we started the line
here in Chicago, and bought a band on, part on
Crave, $750. And give it a chance to pay for it, you
understand, see. And we bought that band and
started playing, started learning how to play
good music. I kind of knew really, and he knew
already, And matter of fact, yes, London had a good
band. They had a band of 14 boys. And the other boys
were working in stands and ties like that. I was
pulling the chains through the swamps,
surveying, recognizing, but never getting
music. And after that band were out, the place was
long, I come to run a saloon there. Well, see, that
old man's been green. Next man I had in London, I had
that band practicing there in a saloon. I was
running a saloon for 50. I took a young band in
there, you understand. That band came here a few
years ago. That band's all gone now. Well, what
sort of pieces were you playing about 1890? Do you
remember? Oh, I played the same piece we played
down yonder. I learned the very same music. Very
same music. 10th and 12th grade music. I learned
it. I had a piece that a white band gave me in
Cleveland. They couldn't play it. And they gave it
to me. And I come up here and took my band and played
it. And came out and played it to them. Yes. Played
it to them. I know it was a man's name. A man gave it to
me. His name was Scott Johnson. He was snagged on
Peter, but he was a man of the band. He said, George,
we can't play, but give it to y'all. And he gave it to
me. But if he had played that week, the next week he
had to go clean with some other and play with them
down there.
Man, I want to hear a quick march. I want to hear it. I
want to hear a quick march. I never care. It's a
heartbeat minute. I want to hear a quick march.
Yeah, an eavescake walk is the hardest thing I ever
played in my life. What is that? An eavescake walk.
Eavescake walk? Yes, the hardest thing I ever
played in my life. Felt great stuff. Yes, sir. I
can't do anything but tonguing and fingering.
Yes, sir. It's all practice solo, every bit of
solo. I never played a sight on my life. I played a
tuba and a cornet. I can play them now. I don't count
my teeth. One bit, two bits. Yes, sir. Do you have,
uh, did you all have a dance hall here at Mount Bio?
Used to, yes, sir. We had a dance hall. A nice dance
hall. We had a dance hall in the low stairs. I'm
trying to lie down, sit down there a piece. I found I
got wet down by a train one day. Couldn't leave it.
Wind was spots on, on the chin on top of the roof,
dry. And such a fire, couldn't put out. Just
managed to get some other tools out of that lodge,
and that's all we done. Well,
what do you think of a town like this? Do you think
that because people can run a town like this? They
can, but they ain't here now. They ain't here now.
You can't get a cross-dye if you ain't got timber.
You've got to have timber to get the cross-dye. You
can't get a bull that's seen like this that's got
timber to make it out of. If the timber's rotten,
dirty, a worm-bitten wormhole there, hit him with
a door. You take a bull with a full wormhole, he's
going to go on the ice at least. Seriously, in this
country. With a wormhole. At least. That's
perfect talk. Sir, you've got to have hard timber.
You can't think to go out the door with a shoe on your
foot and a hole in the bottom. You've got to get your
foot wet. Well, how
long have you been a member of the church?